Add tutorial (#1968)
yewstack/yew: website/src/pages/tutorial.md

## Introduction

In this hands-on tutorial, we will take a look at how we can use Yew to build web applications.
**Yew** is a modern [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) framework for building front-end web apps using [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/).
Yew encourages a reusable, maintainable, and well-structured architecture by leveraging Rust's powerful type system.
A large ecosystem of community-created libraries (or crates?) provide components that work out-of-the-box and
commonly-used patterns such as state management.

> Using WebAssembly also allows us to take advantage of numerous crates available on [crates.io](https://crates.io)

Reviewer: A large ecosystem of community-created libraries, known in Rust as [crates](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch07-01-packages-and-crates.html), provide components for commonly-used patterns such as state management.
[Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/), the package manager for Rust, allows us to take advantage of the numerous crates available on [crates.io](https://crates.io), such as Yew.
```
A large ecosystem of community-created libraries, known in Rust as crates, provide components for commonly-used patterns such as state management.
Cargo, the package manager for Rust, allows us to take advantage of the numerous crates available on crates.io, such as Yew.
```

### What we are going to build

Rustconf is an intergalactic gathering of the Rust community that happens annually.
Rustconf 2020 had a plethora of talks that provided a good amount of information.
In this hands on tutorial, we will be building a web application to help fellow Rustaceans
have overview of the talks, and watch them all from one page.

> 

Reviewer: In this hands-on tutorial, we will be building a web application to help fellow Rustaceans
get an overview of the talks and watch them all from one page.

## Setting up

### Prerequisites

> 

Reviewer: This tutorial assumes you're already familiar with Rust.

If you're new to Rust, the free [Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch00-00-introduction.html) offers a great starting point for beginners and continues to be an excellent resource even for experienced Rust developers.

```
This tutorial assumes you're already familiar with Rust.

If you're new to Rust, the free [Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch00-00-introduction.html) offers a great starting point for beginners and continues to be an excellent resource even for experienced Rust developers.
```

To get started, let's make sure we have an up-to-date development environment.
We will need the following tools:
- [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/).
- [`trunk`](https://trunkrs.dev/)

> This tutorial also assumes you're already familiar with Rust.

Reviewer: - [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
- [Trunk](https://trunkrs.dev/)
- `wasm32-unknown-unknown`, the WASM compiler and build target for Rust

Ensure the latest version of Rust is installed by running `rustup update` or by 
[installing rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) if you haven't already done so already.

After installing Rust, you can use Cargo to install `trunk` by running:

```bash
cargo install trunk
```

We will also need to add the WASM build target by running:

```bash
rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown
```
```
- [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
- [Trunk](https://trunkrs.dev/)
- `wasm32-unknown-unknown`, the WASM compiler and build target for Rust

Ensure the latest version of Rust is installed by running `rustup update` or by 
[installing rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) if you haven't already done so already.

After installing Rust, you can use Cargo to install `trunk` by running:

\`\`\`bash
cargo install trunk
\`\`\`

We will also need to add the WASM build target by running:

\`\`\`bash
rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown
\`\`\`
```

### Setting up the project

First, create a new cargo project:

```bash
cargo new yew-app
cd yew-app

> 

Reviewer: Need "```" here to end the code block.

To verify the Rust environment is set up properly, run the initial project using the cargo build tool. 
After output about the build process, you should see the expected "Hello, world!" message.

```bash
cargo run
```

## Our first static page

To convert this simple command line application to a basic Yew web application, a few changes are needed.
Update the files as follows:

```toml title="Cargo.toml" {7}
[package]
name = "yew-app"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2018"

[dependencies]
+ yew = { git = "https://github.com/yewstack/yew/" }
```

```rust title="src/main.rs"
use yew::prelude::*;

#[function_component(App)]
fn app() -> Html {
    html! {
        <h1>{ "Hello World" }</h1>
    }
}

fn main() {
    yew::start_app::<App>();
}
```

> Now, let's create and `index.html` at the root of the project.

Reviewer: Now, let's create an `index.html` at the root of the project:

```html title="index.html"
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
</head>
<body>

</body>
</html>
```

### Start the development server

Run the following command to build and serve the application locally.

```bash
trunk serve
```

> Trunk will helpfully rebuild your application if you modify any source files.

Reviewer: Trunk will watch the project directory and helpfully rebuild your application if you modify any source files.

```rust
let videos = vec![
    Video {
        id: 1,
        title: "Building and breaking things".to_string(),
        speaker: "John Doe".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 2,
        title: "Building and breaking things".to_string(),
        speaker: "Jane Smith".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 3,
        title: "The development process".to_string(),
        speaker: "Matt Miller".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 4,
        title: "The Web 7.0".to_string(),
        speaker: "Tom Jerry".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
];
```

In order to display them, we need to convert these `Vec`s into `Html`. We can do that by creating an iterator, 
mapping it to `html!` and collecting it as `Html`:

```rust
let videos = videos.iter().map(|video| html! {
    <p>{format!("{}: {}", video.speaker, video.title)}</p>
}).collect::<Html>();
```

## Components

> Components are the building blocks of Yew application. We can combine components, which can be made of other components, 

Reviewer: Components are the building blocks of Yew application. By combining components, which can be made of other components, we build our application.

            <div>
                <h3>{"Videos to watch"}</h3>
                <VideosList videos={videos} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
            </div>
+            { for details }
-            <div>
-                <h3>{ "John Doe: Building and breaking things" }</h3>
-                <img src="https://via.placeholder.com/640x360.png?text=Video+Player+Placeholder" alt="video thumbnail" />
-            </div>
-        </>
    }
}
```

Don't worry about the `use_state` right now, we'll come back to it later. 
Note the trick we pulled with `{ for details }`. `Option<_>` implements `Iterator` so we can use it to display the only
element returned by the `Iterator` with the `{ for ... }` syntax.

### Handling state

Remember the `use_state` used earlier? That is a special function, called a "hook". Hooks are used to "hook" into 
lifecycle of a function component and perform actions. You can learn more about this hook, and others 
[here](/next/concepts/function-components/pre-defined-hooks#use_state)

:::note
Struct components act differently. See the documentation to learn about those.
:::

## Fetching data (using external REST API)

> In a real world application, data will basically never be hardcoded but instead will come from an API. Let's fetch our 

Reviewer: In a real world application, data will usually come from an API instead of being hardcoded. Let's fetch our

videos list from external source. For this we will need to add the following crates:
- [`reqwasm`](https://crates.io/crates/reqwasm)
  For making the fetch call.
- [`serde`](https://serde.rs) with derive features
  For de-serializing the JSON response 
- [`wasm-bindgen-futures`](https://crates.io/crates/wasm-bindgen-futures)
  For executing Rust Future as a Promise

Let's update the dependencies in `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[dependencies]
reqwasm = "0.2"
serde = { version = "1.0", features = ["derive"] }
wasm-bindgen-futures = "0.4"
```

Update the `Video` struct to derive the `Deserialize` trait:

```rust {1-2}
- #[derive(Clone, PartialEq)]
+ #[derive(Clone, PartialEq, Deserialize)]
struct Video {
    id: usize,
    title: String,
    speaker: String,
    url: String,
}
```

> Now as the last step, we need to update our `App` component to make the fetch request instead of using hardcoded data

Reviewer: Now as the last step, we need to update our `App` component to make the fetch request:

```rust {3-23,32-33}
#[function_component(App)]
fn app() -> Html {
-    let videos = vec![
-        // ...
-    ]
+    let videos = use_state(|| vec![]);
+    {
+        let videos = videos.clone();
+        use_effect(move || {
+            let videos = videos.clone();
+            wasm_bindgen_futures::spawn_local(async move {
+                let fetched_videos: Vec<Video> = Request::get("https://yew.rs/tutorial/data.json")
+                    .send()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap()
+                    .json()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap();
+                videos.set(fetched_videos);
+            });
+            || ()
+        });
+    }

    // ...
 
    html! {
        <>
            <h1>{ "RustConf Explorer" }</h1>
            <div>
                <h3>{"Videos to watch"}</h3>
-                <VideosList videos={videos} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
+                <VideosList videos={(*videos).clone()} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
            </div>
            { for details }
        </>
    }
}
```

:::note

> We're using `unwrap`s here because it is a demo application. In a real world, you want to have proper error handling.

Reviewer: ```We're using `unwrap`s here because it is a demo application. In a real world, you want to have [proper error handling](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-02-recoverable-errors-with-result.html).```

## Introduction

In this hands-on tutorial, we will take a look at how we can use Yew to build applications for the browser.

> **Yew** is a modern [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) framework front-end web apps using [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/).

Author: If we were to change that, I think all the Yew taglines should be changed together (potentially in a different PR)

It lets us build web applications in a modern and well-structured way, focusing on the maintainability and re-usability of components
and management of the application state. It is supported by a large ecosystem of community-created materials and components.

Of course, using webassembly and Rust allows us to reuse our knowledge about language, it's syntax and tooling to
build front-end applications with modern technology while making use of crates available on [crates.io](https://crates.io/)

### What we are going to build

Rustconf is an intergalactic gathering of the Rust-language community that happens annually.

> Last year, Rustconf 2020 had a plethora of talks that provided a good amount of information.

Author: I don't see how it really matters though.

In this hands on tutorial, we'll be building a web application that may helps, us, Rustaceans,
have overview of the talks, and watch them all from one page.

## Setting up

### Prerequisites

To get started, let's make sure we have installed an up-to-date development environment.
We need the following tools to get started:
- [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/).
- [`trunk`](https://trunkrs.dev/)

This tutorial also assumes you're already familiar with Rust.

### Setting up the project

First, create a new cargo project:

```bash
cargo new yew-app
```

Navigate to the newly created `yew-app` directory. 

```bash
cd yew-app

> ```

Author: I added it because the getting started guide had it. I'll remove it.

To verify the Rust environment is set up properly, run the initial project using the cargo build tool. 

> After output about the build process, you should see the expected "Hello World" message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After output about the build process, you should see the expected "Hello, world!" message.
```

```bash
cargo run
```

## Our first static page

To convert this simple command line application to a basic Yew web application, a few changes are needed.
Update the files as follows:

```toml title="Cargo.toml" {7}
[package]
name = "yew-app"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2018"

[dependencies]

> + yew = { git = "https://github.com/yewstack/yew/" }

Reviewer 2: Should we recommend using the git version of Yew in the tutorial?
Perhaps there should be something similar on the [Rocket getting started page](https://rocket.rs/v0.5-rc/guide/getting-started/#hello-world)

Author: I used git because the there's too many breaking changes between the release version and master. This can be switched to 0.19 once that is released.

```

```rust title="src/main.rs"
use yew::prelude::*;

#[function_component(App)]
fn app() -> Html {
    html! {
        <h1>{ "Hello World" }</h1>
    }
}

fn main() {
    yew::start_app::<App>();
}
```

Now, let's create and `index.html` at the root of the project.

```html title="index.html"
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>

>     <title>Title</title>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Nit: I think this is redundant

</head>
<body>

</body>
</html>
```

> ### Run the development server

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Start the development server
```

Run the following command to build and serve the application locally.

```bash
trunk serve
```

> Trunk will helpfully rebuild your application if you modify any of its files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trunk will helpfully rebuild your application if you modify any source files.
```

### Congratulations

> You have now successfully set up your Yew development environment, and built your first Yew web application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have now successfully set up your Yew development environment and built your first Yew web application.
```

Next, we'll create instances of this struct in our `app` function and use those instead of hardcoding the data:

```rust
let videos = vec![
    Video {
        id: 1,
        title: "Building and breaking things".to_string(),
        speaker: "John Doe".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 2,
        title: "Building and breaking things".to_string(),
        speaker: "Jane Smith".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 3,
        title: "The development process".to_string(),
        speaker: "Matt Miller".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
    Video {
        id: 4,
        title: "The Web 7.0".to_string(),
        speaker: "Tom Jerry".to_string(),
        url: "https://youtu.be/PsaFVLr8t4E".to_string(),
    },
];
```

In order to display them, we need to convert these `Vec`s into `Html`. We can do that by creating an iterator, 
mapping it to `html!` and collecting it as `Html`:

```rust
let videos = videos.iter().map(|video| html! {
    <p>{format!("{}: {}", video.speaker, video.title)}</p>
}).collect::<Html>();
```

> 

Reviewer 2: The html here and the one in the previous section are not identical. This might confuse the reader. The code snippet here should either be fixed or it should be explicitly that this is only the video list html.

Author: I think it is fairly obvious that this is just the videos list as it's mapping the videos and doing nothing else.

## Components

Components are the building blocks of Yew application. We can combine components, which can be made of other components, 
we build our application. By structuring our components for re-usability and keeping them generic, we'll be able to use 
them in multiple parts of our application without having to duplicate code or logic.

In fact, the `app` function we have been using so far is a component, called `App`. It is a "function component".
There are two different types of components in Yew.
1. Struct Components
2. Function Components

In this tutorial, we'll be using function components.

Now, let's split up our `App` component into smaller components. We'll begin by extracting the videos list into 
its own component.

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Properties, PartialEq)]
struct VideosListProps {
    videos: Vec<Video>,
}

#[function_component(VideosList)]
fn videos_list(VideosListProps { videos }: &VideosListProps) -> Html {
    videos.iter().map(|video| html! {
        <p>{format!("{}: {}", video.speaker, video.title)}</p>
    }).collect()
}
```

> Notice the parameters of our `VideosList` function component. A function component takes in only one argument which 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice the parameters of our `VideosList` function component. A function component takes only one argument which 
```

> defines its "props" (short for "properties"). Props are used to pass data down from parent component to child component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
defines its "props" (short for "properties"). Props are used to pass data down from a parent component to a child component.
```

+        <VideoDetails video={video.clone()} />
+    });

    html! {
        <>
            <h1>{ "RustConf Explorer" }</h1>
            <div>
                <h3>{"Videos to watch"}</h3>
                <VideosList videos={videos} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
            </div>
+            { for details }
-            <div>
-                <h3>{ "John Doe: Building and breaking things" }</h3>
-                <img src="https://via.placeholder.com/640x360.png?text=Video+Player+Placeholder" alt="video thumbnail" />
-            </div>
-        </>
    }
}
```

Don't worry about the `use_state` right now, we'll come back to it later. 
Note the trick we pulled with `{ for details }`. `Option<_>` implements `Iterator` so we can use it to display the only
element returned by the `Iterator` with the `{ for ... }` syntax.

### Handling state

Remember the `use_state` used earlier? That is a special function, called a "hook". Hooks are used to "hook" into 
lifecycle of a function component and perform actions. You can learn more about this hook, and others 
[here](/next/concepts/function-components/pre-defined-hooks#use_state)

:::note

> Struct components act differently. See the documentation to learn about those.

Reviewer 2: Need a link

Author: I'm not sure where to link. Do you know the exact page that should be linked here?

Reviewer 2: How about simply https://yew.rs/concepts/components?

Reviewer: ```Struct components act differently. See the documentation on [Components](https://yew.rs/concepts/components?) to learn about those.```

:::

## Fetching data (using external REST API)

In a real world application, data will basically never be hardcoded but instead will come from an API. Let's fetch our 
videos list from external source. For this we will need to add the following crates:

> - [`reqwasm`](https://crates.io/crates/reqwasm)

Reviewer 2: (Side note: nothing against `reqwasm` but it would certainly be nice if we could suggest using a more "official" library. Since you are also a maintainer for `gloo`, maybe something like `reqwasm` could be ported over?)

Author: I would love to but I'm holding off because I can't publish gloo. I don't have permissions on crates.io

fn app() -> Html {
-    let videos = vec![
-        // ...
-    ]
+    let videos = use_state(|| vec![]);
+    {
+        let videos = videos.clone();
+        use_effect(move || {
+            let videos = videos.clone();
+            wasm_bindgen_futures::spawn_local(async move {
+                let fetched_videos: Vec<Video> = Request::get("https://yew.rs/tutorial/data.json")
+                    .send()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap()
+                    .json()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap();
+                videos.set(fetched_videos);
+            });
+            || ()
+        });
+    }

    // ...
 
    html! {
        <>
            <h1>{ "RustConf Explorer" }</h1>
            <div>
                <h3>{"Videos to watch"}</h3>
-                <VideosList videos={videos} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
+                <VideosList videos={(*videos).clone()} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
            </div>
            { for details }
        </>
    }
}
```

:::note
We're using `unwrap`s here because it is a demo application. In a real world, you want to have proper error handling.
:::

> Now look at the browser to see everything working as expected... Which would've been the case if it weren't for CORS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now look at the browser to see everything working as expected... which would've been the case if it weren't for CORS.
```

In order to fix that, we need a proxy server. Luckily trunk provides that.

Update the following line:

```rust {2-3}
// ...
-                let fetched_videos: Vec<Video> = Request::get("https://yew.rs/tutorial/data.json")
+                let fetched_videos: Vec<Video> = Request::get("/tutorial/data.json")
// ...
```

Now, rerun the server with the following command:

```bash
trunk serve --proxy-backend=https://yew.rs/tutorial
```

> Refresh the tab and incredible, everything works as expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refresh the tab and everything should work as expected.
```

## Wrapping up

Congratulations! You’ve created a web application that fetches data from external API and displays a list of videos.

## What's next

Obviously, this application is very far from perfect or useful. After going through this tutorial, 
you can use it as a jumping-off point to explore more advanced topics.

### Styles

Our apps look very ugly. There's no CSS, or any kind of styles.
Unfortunately, Yew doesn't offer a built-in way to style components. See [Trunk's assets](https://trunkrs.dev/assets/)
to learn how to add style sheets.

### More libraries

Our app made use of only a few external dependencies. There are lots of crates out there that can be used.

> See [external libraries](/next/more/external-libs) for more details.

Reviewer 2: Should `/next/` be hardcoded here?

Author: For now, it has to be. We can fix that after the next release. Links default to the latest (0.18 in this case) version and that page doesn't exist there.

### Learning more about Yew

> Read our [official documentation](/next). It explains a lot of concepts in much more details.

Reviewer 2: And here

```rust {3-23,32-33}
#[function_component(App)]
fn app() -> Html {
-    let videos = vec![
-        // ...
-    ]
+    let videos = use_state(|| vec![]);
+    {
+        let videos = videos.clone();
+        use_effect(move || {
+            let videos = videos.clone();
+            wasm_bindgen_futures::spawn_local(async move {
+                let fetched_videos: Vec<Video> = Request::get("https://yew.rs/tutorial/data.json")
+                    .send()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap()
+                    .json()
+                    .await
+                    .unwrap();
+                videos.set(fetched_videos);
+            });
+            || ()
+        });
+    }

    // ...
 
    html! {
        <>
            <h1>{ "RustConf Explorer" }</h1>
            <div>
                <h3>{"Videos to watch"}</h3>
-                <VideosList videos={videos} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
+                <VideosList videos={(*videos).clone()} on_click={on_video_select.clone()} />
            </div>
            { for details }
        </>
    }
}
```

:::note

> We're using `unwrap`s here because it is a demo application. In a real world, In a real world, you want to have 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're using `unwrap`s here because this is a demo application. In a real world app, you should use
```

Author: It's too late to comment here, I guess. If you think this change should be incorporated, you should make new PR.

Reviewer 3: Oh lol true 😄 I was just skimming it over and noticed noticed the typo. I completely forgot that it was already merged.
Sorry about that

Author: I also just noticed the typo. It would be great if you could fix it in a PR

Reviewer 3: On it

Reviewer 3: Done https://github.com/yewstack/yew/pull/1990
